# Measuring inequality

**AAG abstract**

> The demographic and economic forces at the root of ongoing population loss come with myriad consequences, both fiscal and social: tax bases erode, as do employment bases and social cohesion. At the same time, because the demographic sources of loss – out-migration and eventual natural decrease – are selective, the demographic composition of shrinking places can also be expected to change. Certainly, shrinking places can expect to become older, for example, as younger residents leave declining areas for better opportunities. Less well explored are the effects on income inequality and racial/ethnic diversity, key characteristics of places that have long been of interest to social scientists. In this paper we ask two questions on this subject, taking U.S. counties as our unit of analysis. First, what are the county-level impacts of depopulation on inequality—measured in terms of income and racial/ethnic diversity. Second, to what extent are shrinking counties responsible for increasing inequalities that may be observed at the national scale? To answer these questions we employ county-level data for 1990, 2000, and 2010 from NHGIS. 

## Objective
Examine the association between population loss and income inequality (racial/ethnic component largely resolved). This is posed as a causal question: how does the makeup of the population after a period/process of selective outmigration alter the income distribution of those remaining at the end of an observation period? The focus is on changes at the county level.

## Hypotheses/Conceptual Framework
How do we think population loss impacts income distributions at the county level? From prior research we know young adults are more likely than others to emigrate for education and employment opportunities. The leaves behind relatively larger percentages of older age cohorts, as well as established middle-age families (though there may be relatively fewer of these to start with in loss places). What does this mean for the income distribution? Census total income tables include social security, as well as other forms of public assistance. Do these government transfers matter for our analysis? If students and seniors are the two groups we most expect to emigrate and remain, respectively, what does this mean for the overall income distribution or specific components (percentiles) of the income distribution? What about low-income adults? These groups might lack the resources to relocate. But urban areas, including shrinking cities, attract persons in poverty because of government assistance programs (Glaeser 2008, Why do the poor live in cities?). Population _growth_ is known to be related to increasing inequality as households at both extremes of the income distribution move to large cities and metros. This is a distinctly urban process, while population loss is largely a rural phenomenon, at least at the county scale.

It is important to note that unlike race/ethnicity, individuals' income changes over time. This is expected as individuals age. Does this add complications to comparing Gini coefficients or other measures of inequality over time? How does this growth in age and earners interact with hypothesized patterns of selective outmigration to change income distributions? 

Wages are also likely to fall _for the same people_ in places losing population, as hours and wages are cut in the face of reduced demand and firm closure/relocation.

What is the appropriate time period to observe these changes? It seems like a decade may be too brief a period to observe substantial enough change. How many people actually enter/leave during a decade in rural counties? How do they differ from the population at the starting period, and are they different enough to alter the income distribution in ten years or less?

Why does income inequality matter at the county scale, esp. for places losing population?

> Second, to what extent are shrinking counties responsible for increasing inequalities that may be observed at the national scale?

What exactly is this question asking? Income inequality at the national scale is a function of stagnant wages for the majority of earners while the top earners receive a grossly disproportionate share of aggregate earnings. Places losing population are likely to have large numbers of low-income people, but so are growing urban areas. Some rural places losing population are also overwhelmingly inhabited by pensioners, likely reducing their contribution to aggregate income inequality.

## Data and Measures

So far I have been calculating income inequality by estimating the Gini coef from binned income data between 1990, 2000, and 2008-2012 income data. This approach appears best for estimating values in a given year, not for comparing change over time. This is noted by the authors of the R package, binequality. Prior work examining inequality relying on publicly available data has typically estimated Gini at geographic levels larger than counties using microsample data. So one option would be to use IPUMS data and work with PUMAs over time. This would be ideal if we are concerned with population loss and income inequality in broader historical context. If we are principally concerned with the recent association between loss and inequality, we can draw on ACS tables at the county level, which include Gini as well as data on income quintiles. We could therefore calculation 80/20 and 95/20 income ratios, which are commonly used alone or in combination with Gini to study income inequality.

In terms of problems using the Gini coef, there is no problem comparing Gini over time in the event of loss of middle-income households. The principal limitation of the Gini is that it does not account for absolute poverty or wealth of two different populations. Income could be identically (mal-)distributed in two different time periods with different upper and lower levels of income.

For the moment, I suggest looking at the ACS data across the widest possible period. Since we are also looking at low-population counties, we should probably use 5-year estimates, with 2010 being the earliest survey and 2017 being the latest survey. ACS 1-year estimates are, however, available from 2006 to 2017, but small counties are missing. Only 783 counties have data for ACS 1-year. This period includes the recession, which is responsible for increasing inequality at a broader scale. Do we want to partial out differences between each place and the nation? I think we tried this before, the results are mathematically identical - it is a simple uniform data transformation.

If we proceed with ACS data, do we want to use the same two surveys being compared for change in income inequality for change in population as well? Or do we want to use a longer period? More broadly, how do we theorize the relationship between population change and income inequality? Over what period or with what amount would we expect to see change income inequality?	Another issue: if we use ACS 1-year, we would likely need to drop low-population counties due to margin of error, but these are precisely the places we might be interested in examining, as they likely include rural counties losing population.

**IRS data** would allow us to compare the income of in and out 
