# measuring income inequality

So far I have been calculating income inequality by estimating the Gini coef from binned income data between 1990, 2000, and 2008-2012 income data. This approach appears best for estimating values in a given year, not for comparing change over time. This is noted by the authors of the R package, binequality. Prior work examining inequality relying on publicly available data has typically estimated Gini at geographic levels larger than counties using microsample data. So one option would be to use IPUMS data and work with PUMAs over time. This would be ideal if we are concerned with population loss and income inequality in broader historical context. If we are principally concerned with the recent association between loss and inequality, we can draw on ACS tables at the county level, which include Gini as well as data on income quintiles. We could therefore calculation 80/20 and 95/20 income ratios, which are commonly used alone or in combination with Gini to study income inequality.

In terms of problems using the Gini coef, there is no problem comparing Gini over time in the event of loss of middle-income households. The principal limitation of the Gini is that it does not account for the absolute poverty or wealth of two different populations. Income could be identically (mal-)distributed in two different time periods with different upper and lower levels of income. Secondly, are perhaps more germane for looking across a period of a decade is the fact that inequality may be driven for demographic reasons, esp. households earning more as they age. In a regression analysis, this could be controlled for by accounted in some way for initial age distribution.

For the moment, I suggest looking at the ACS data across the widest possible period. Since we are also looking at low-population counties, we should probably use 5-year estimates, with 2010 being the earliest survey and 2017 being the latest survey. ACS 1-year estimates are, however, available from 2006 to 2017, but small counties are missing. Only 783 counties have data for ACS 1-year. This period includes the recession, which is responsible for increasing inequality at a broader scale. Do we want to partial out differences between each place and the nation? I think we tried this before, the results are mathematically identical - it is a simple uniform data transformation.

If we proceed with ACS data, do we want to use the same two surveys being compared for change in income inequality for change in population as well? Or do we want to use a longer period? More broadly, how do we theorize the relationship between population change and income inequality? Over what period or with what amount would we expect to see change income inequality?	Another issue: if we use ACS 1-year, we would likely need to drop low-population counties due to margin of error, but these are precisely the places we might be interested in examining, as they likely include rural counties losing population. _what about places where change is not statistically significant using ACS MOE?_

What about reverse causation? Does income inequality, either lower or higher values, drive population change?

Change in income inequality is very shallow and has tapered off over time.

_In how many counties has there been a statistically significant change in income inequality? MAP_

The relevant tables:
* B19080: household income quintile upper limits

Income inequality does not change much in a given location over 10 or fewer years.

What is it that we think might actually be happening under conditions of population loss? How do think loss impacts localized income inequality? Who is more likely to leave? I think this depends on which decade/historical period and rural/urban status. I would think young adults are likely to leave places losing population no matter time or status. But there has been a recent selective inmigration of higher-income younger households. I think we need to spend time thinking through our assumptions about possible pathways before reaching for new data or measures. Income inequality could conceivably worsen in or improve in places losing population. The loss of young adults earning in the middle of the distribution would widen income inequality, while the the loss of higher income earners _might_ decrease inequality, depending on the distribution among remaining households. Change in inequality is therefore also a function of age composition, as people age into higher income age cohorts. It is possible for the entire distribution to shift down, with declining median income but identical inequality. I suspect the important inequality is _between place_ inequality, not _within place_ inequality. How can we measure _contributions_ to widening _between place_ inequality? Can we use shift-share to decompose population change by income category? What unit would make the most sense? MSA, county, city? How can we compare places in terms of income given geographic variation in cost of living? How could we, for instance, compare places in terms of low- middle- and upper-income households? What about change in income percentile for counties across periods? In regression, this is a synonym for income. They are functionally equivalent.

_AAG RQ2: To what extent are shrinking counties responsible for increasing inequalities at the national scale?_ How could we answer this question? With regard to diversity, this sounds like the type of decompositional question we have been asking about metros. Do we want to examine contributions to national between-county segregation based on growth and loss status? What would that actually tell us: whether growth or loss counties, as a whole, are more or less diverse than the nation. But the result are also a function of county population size. _is national inequality meant to signify between-county income segregation?_ Census data is limited wrt information on high income earners. Less diverse = more equal.

In terms of contributions or _responsibility_ for national income inequality, what can we say? Income is tricky because of the cost of living issue, but does that matter for inequality studies? I'm not well read in this literature. What is the actual process we want to examine here? Is the hypothesis that shrinking places become increasingly uniformly low income, while growing places become increasingly uniformly high income? I don't think that is accurate. Is it something else we want to examine? 

Maybe take county per capita income and calculation deviation from national value or average over time.

Income segregation using income entropy scores? This makes sense for individual metros, but what about across the nation? Cost of living adjustments, etc. wouldn't not be considered.

PLACES BECOME POOORER WITHOUT DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE TOO